<!-- source: Numerical Methods for Differential Equations, Butcher.pdf -->

<!-- pdf_type: normal; pages: 484; chunk_pages: 70 -->


<!-- chunk 0001: pages 1-70 -->
# Numerical Methods for Ordinary Differential Equations

SECOND EDITION

# Numerical Methods for Ordinary Differential Equations

# Numerical Methods for Ordinary Differential Equations

Second Edition

J. C. Butcher The University of Auckland, New Zealand

# Copyright c 2008 John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex PO19 8SQ, England

Telephone (+44) 1243 779777

Email (for orders and customer service enquiries): cs-books@wiley.co.uk Visit our Home Page on www.wileyeurope.com or www.wiley.com

All Rights Reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except under the terms of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 or under the terms of a licence issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, 90 Tottenham Court Road, London W1T 4LP, UK, without the permission in writing of the Publisher. Requests to the Publisher should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex PO19 8SQ, England, or emailed to permreq@wiley.co.uk, or faxed to (+44) 1243 770620.

This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the Publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional should be sought.

# Other Wiley Editorial Offices

John Wiley & Sons Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA

Jossey-Bass, 989 Market Street, San Francisco, CA 94103-1741, USA

Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH, Boschstr. 12, D-69469 Weinheim, Germany

John Wiley & Sons Australia Ltd, 42 McDougall Street, Milton, Queensland 4064, Australia

John Wiley & Sons (Asia) Pte Ltd, 2 Clementi Loop #02-01, Jin Xing Distripark, Singapore 129809

John Wiley & Sons Canada Ltd, 6045 Freemont Blvd, Mississauga, ONT, L5R 4J3

Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be available in electronic books.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Butcher, J.C. (John Charles), 1933-   
Numerical methods for ordinary differential equations/J.C. Butcher. p.cm.   
Includes bibliographical references and index.   
ISBN 978-0-470-72335-7 (cloth)   
1. Differential equations—Numerical solutions. I. Title.   
QA372.B94 2008   
518- .63—dc22   
2008002747

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data

A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library

Typeset in LATEX using Computer Modern fonts Printed and bound in Great Britain by TJ International, Padstow, Cornwall

# Contents

Preface to the first edition xiii

Preface to the second edition . xvii
