# 380 Motivation

For any specific $N$ -dimensional initial value problem, Runge–Kutta methods can be viewed as mappings from $\mathbb { R } ^ { N }$ to $\mathbb { R } ^ { N }$ . However, the semi-group generated by such mappings has a significance independent of the particular initial value problem, or indeed of the vector space in which solution values lie. If a method with $s _ { 1 }$ stages is composed with a second method with $s _ { 2 }$ stages, then the combined method with $s _ { 1 } + s _ { 2 }$ stages can be thought of as the product of the original methods. It turns out that this is not quite the best way of formulating this product, and we need to work with equivalence classes of Runge–Kutta methods. This will also enable us to construct a group, rather than a mere semi-group.

It will be shown that the composition group of Runge–Kutta equivalent classes is homomorphic to a group on mappings from trees to real numbers. In fact the mapping that corresponds to a specific Runge–Kutta method is just the function that takes each tree to the associated elementary weight.

There are several reasons for introducing and studying these groups. For Runge–Kutta methods themselves, it is possible to gain a better understanding of the order conditions by looking at them in this way. Furthermore, methods satisfying certain simplifying assumptions, notably the $C$ and $D$ conditions, reappear as normal subgroups of the main group. An early application of this theory is the introduction of the concept of ‘effective order’. This is a natural generalization from this point of view, but makes very little sense from a purely computational point of view. While effective order was not widely accepted at the time of its discovery, it has been rediscovered (L´opez-Marcos, Sanz-Serna and Skeel, 1996) and has now been seen to have further ramifications.

The final claim that is made for this theory is that it has applications to the analysis of the order of general linear methods. In this guise a richer structure, incorporating an additive as well as a multiplicative operation, needs to be used; the present section also examines this more elaborate algebra.

The primary source for this theory is Butcher (1972), but it is also widely known through the work of Hairer and Wanner (1974). Recently the algebraic structures described here have been rediscovered through applications in theoretical physics. For a review of these developments, see Brouder (2000).

Before proceeding with this programme, we remark that the mappings from trees to real numbers, which appear as members of the algebraic systems introduced in this section, are associated with formal Taylor series of the form

$$
a ( \emptyset ) y ( x ) + \sum _ { t \in T } { \frac { a ( t ) } { \sigma ( t ) } } h ^ { r ( t ) } F ( t ) ( y ( x ) ) .
$$

Such expressions as this were given the name B-series by Hairer and Wanner

(1974) and written

$$
B ( a , y ( x ) ) ,
$$

where $a : T ^ { \# } \to \mathbb { R }$ , with $T ^ { \# }$ denoting the set of rooted trees $T$ together with an additional empty tree $\varnothing$ . Because of the central role of the exact solution series, in which $a ( \emptyset ) = 1$ and $a ( t ) = 1 / \gamma ( t )$ , Hairer and Wanner scale the terms in the series slightly differently, and write

$$
\begin{array} { l l l } { { \displaystyle { \cal B } ( a , y ( x ) ) = a ( \emptyset ) y ( x ) + \sum _ { t \in T } \frac { \alpha ( t ) a ( t ) } { r ( t ) ! } h ^ { r ( t ) } F ( t ) ( y ( x ) ) } } \\ { { \displaystyle ~ = a ( \emptyset ) y ( x ) + \sum _ { t \in T } \frac { a ( t ) } { \gamma ( t ) \sigma ( t ) ! } h ^ { r ( t ) } F ( t ) ( y ( x ) ) , } } \end{array}
$$

where $\alpha ( t )$ is the function introduced in Subsection 302. This means that the B-series representing a Runge–Kutta method with order $p$ will have $a ( t ) = 1$ whenever $r ( t ) \leq p$ . In this book we concentrate on the coefficients themselves, rather than on the series, but it will be the interpretation as coefficients in (380a), and not as coefficients in (380b), that will always be intended.
