# 381 Equivalence classes of Runge–Kutta methods

We consider three apparently distinct ways in which two Runge–Kutta methods may be considered equivalent. Our aim will be to define these three equivalence relations and then show that they are actually equivalent equivalence relations. By this we mean that if two methods are equivalent in one of the three senses then they are equivalent also in each of the other senses. We temporarily refer to these three equivalence relations as ‘equivalence’, ‘ $\Phi$ - equivalence’ and $P$ -equivalence’, respectively.

Definition 381A Two Runge–Kutta methods are ‘equivalent’ if, for any initial value problem defined by an autonomous function $f$ satisfying a Lipschitz condition, and an initial value $y _ { 0 }$ , there exists $h _ { 0 } ~ > ~ 0$ such that the result computed by the first method is identical with the result computed by the second method, if $h \leq h _ { 0 }$ .

Definition 381B Two Runge–Kutta methods are $\cdot _ { \Phi }$ -equivalent’ if, for any $t \in T$ , the elementary weight $\Phi ( t )$ corresponding to the first method is equal to $\Phi ( t )$ corresponding to the second method.

In introducing $P$ -equivalence, we need to make use of the concept of reducibility of a method. By this we mean that the method can be replaced by a method with fewer stages formed by eliminating stages that do not contribute in any way to the final result, and combining stages that are essentially the same into a single stage. We now formalize these two types of reducibility.

Definition 381C A Runge–Kutta method $( A , b ^ { \prime } , c )$ is $^ { \small 4 }$ -reducible’ if the stage index set can be partitioned into two subsets $\{ 1 , 2 , \ldots , s \} = P _ { 0 } \cup P _ { 1 }$ such that $b _ { i } = 0$ for all $i \in P _ { 0 }$ and such that $a _ { i j } = 0$ if $i \in P _ { 1 }$ and $j \in \mathcal { P } _ { 0 }$ . The method formed by deleting all stages indexed by members of $P _ { 0 }$ is known as the $^ { \small 4 }$ -reduced method’.

Definition 381D A Runge–Kutta method $( A , b ^ { \prime } , c )$ is $^ { \cdot } P$ -reducible’ if the stage index set can be partitioned into $\{ 1 , 2 , \ldots , s \} = P _ { 1 } \cup P _ { 2 } \cup \ldots \cup P _ { \overline { { s } } }$ and if, for all $I , J = 1 , 2 , \ldots , { \overline { { s } } }$ , $\textstyle \sum _ { j \in P _ { J } } a _ { i j }$ is constant for all $i \in P _ { I }$ . The method $( \overline { { A } } , \overline { { b } } ^ { \intercal } , \overline { { c } } )$ , with $\overline { { s } }$ stages with $\begin{array} { r } { \overline { { a } } _ { I J } = \sum _ { j \in P _ { J } } a _ { i j } } \end{array}$ , for $i \in P _ { I }$ , $\textstyle { \overline { { b } } } _ { I } = \sum _ { i \in P _ { I } } b _ { i }$ and $\overline { { c } } _ { I } = c _ { i }$ , for $i \in P _ { I }$ , is known as the $P$ -reduced method.

Definition 381E A Runge–Kutta method is ‘irreducible’ if it is neither 0-reducible nor $P$ -reducible. The method formed from a method by first carrying out a $P$ -reduction and then carrying out a 0-reduction is said to be the ‘reduced method’.

Definition 381F Two Runge–Kutta methods are $^ { \circ }$ -equivalent’ if each of them reduces to the same reduced method.

Theorem 381G Let $( A , b ^ { \intercal } , c )$ be an irreducible $s$ -stage Runge–Kutta method. Then, for any two stage indices $i , j \in \{ 1 , 2 , \dots , s \}$ , there exists a Lipschitzcontinuous differential equation system such that $Y _ { i } \neq Y _ { j }$ . Furthermore, there exists $t \in T$ , such that $\Phi _ { i } ( t ) \neq \Phi _ { j } ( t )$ .

Proof. If $i , j$ exist such that

$$
\Phi _ { i } ( t ) = \Phi _ { j } ( t ) \quad { \mathrm { f o r ~ a l l ~ } } t \in T ,
$$

then define a partition $P = \{ P _ { 1 } , P _ { 2 } , . . . , P _ { \overline { { s } } } \}$ of $\{ 1 , 2 , \ldots , s \}$ such that $i$ and $j$ are in the same component of the partition if and only if (381a) holds. Let $\mathcal { A }$ denote the algebra of vectors in $\mathbb { R } ^ { s }$ such that, if $i$ and $j$ are in the same component of $P$ , then the $i$ and $j$ components of $v \in { \mathcal { A } }$ are identical. The algebra is closed under vector space operations and under component-bycomponent multiplication. Note that the vector with every component equal to $^ { 1 }$ is also in $\mathcal { A }$ . Let $\hat { \cal A }$ denote the subalgebra generated by the vectors made up from the values of the elementary weights for the stages for all trees. That is, if $t \in T$ , then $v \in \mathbb { R } ^ { s }$ defined by $v _ { i } = \Phi _ { i } ( t )$ , $i = 1 , 2 , \dots , s$ , is in $\hat { \cal A }$ , as are the component-by-component products of the vectors corresponding to any finite set of trees. In particular, by using the empty set, we can regard the vector defined by $v _ { i } = 1$ as also being a member of $\hat { \cal A }$ . Because of the way in which elementary weights are constructed, $v \in \widehat { A }$ implies $A v \in { \widehat { A } }$ . We now show that $\widehat { A } = A$ . Let $I$ and $J$ be two distinct members of $P$ . Then because $t \in T$ exists so that $\Phi _ { i } ( t ) \neq \Phi _ { j } ( t )$ for $i \in I$ and $j \in J$ , we can find $v \in { \mathcal { A } }$ so that $v _ { i } \neq v _ { j }$ . Hence, if $w = ( v _ { i } - v _ { j } ) ^ { - 1 } ( v - v _ { j } 1 )$ , where $1$ in this context represents the vector in $\mathbb { R } ^ { s }$ with every component equal to 1, then $w _ { i } = 1$ and $w _ { j } = 0$ . Form the product of all such members of the algebra for $J \ne I$ and we deduce that the characteristic function of $I$ is a member of $\mathcal { A }$ . Since the $S$ such vectors constitute a basis for this algebra, it follows that $\widehat { A } = A$ . Multiply the characteristic function of $J$ by $A$ and note that, for all $i \in I \in P$ , the corresponding component in the product is the same. This contradicts the assumption that the method is irreducible. Suppose it were possible that two stages, $Y _ { i }$ and $Y _ { j }$ , say, give identical results for any Lipschitz continuous differential equation, provided $h > 0$ is sufficiently small. We now prove the contradictory result that $\Phi _ { i } ( t ) = \Phi _ { j } ( t )$ for all $t \in T$ . If there were a $t \in T$ for which this does not hold, then write $U$ for a finite subset of $T$ containing $t$ as in Subsection 314. Construct the corresponding differential equation as in that subsection and consider a numerical solution using the Runge–Kutta method $( A , b ^ { \prime } , c )$ and suppose that $t$ corresponds to component $k$ of the differential equation. The value of component $k$ of $Y _ { i }$ is $\Phi _ { i } ( t )$ and the value of component $k$ of $Y _ { j }$ is $\Phi _ { j } ( t )$ . 

Now the key result interrelating the three equivalence concepts.

Theorem 381H Two Runge–Kutta methods are equivalent if and only if they are $P$ -equivalent and if and only if they are $\Phi$ -equivalent.

# Proof.

$P$ -equivalence $\Rightarrow$ equivalence. It will enough to prove that if $i , j ~ \in ~ P _ { I }$ , in any $P$ -reducible Runge–Kutta method, where we have used the notation of Definition 381D, then for any initial value problem, as in Definition 381A, $Y _ { i } = Y _ { j }$ , for $h < h _ { 0 }$ . Calculate the stages by iteration starting with $Y _ { i } ^ { \left[ 0 \right] } = \eta$ , for every $i \in \{ 1 , 2 , \ldots , s \}$ . The value of $Y _ { i } ^ { \left[ k \right] }$ in iteration $k$ will be identical for all $i$ in the same partitioned component.

$P$ -equivalence ⇒ Φ-equivalence. Let the stages be partitioned according to $\{ 1 , 2 , \ldots , s \} = P _ { 1 } \cup P _ { 2 } \cup \ldots \cup P _ { \overline { { s } } }$ and assume that a Runge–Kutta method is reducible with respect to this partition. It will be enough to prove that, for all $t \in T$ , $\Phi _ { i } ( t ) = \Phi _ { j } ( t )$ if $i$ and $j$ belong to the same component. This follows by induction on the order of $t$ . It is true for $t = \tau$ because $\Phi _ { i } ( t ) = c _ { i }$ is constant for all $i$ in the same component. For $t = [ t _ { 1 } t _ { 2 } \cdot \cdot \cdot t _ { m } ]$ ,

$$
\Phi _ { i } ( [ t _ { 1 } t _ { 2 } \cdot \cdot \cdot t _ { m } ] ) = \sum _ { j = 1 } ^ { s } a _ { i j } \prod _ { k = 1 } ^ { m } \Phi _ { j } ( t _ { k } )
$$

and this also is constant for all $i$ in the same component.

$\Phi$ -equivalence  P -equivalence. Suppose two methods are $\Phi$ -equivalent but not $P$ -equivalent. Combine the $s$ stages of method 1 and the $\widehat { s }$ stages of method 2, together with the output approximations, into a single method and replace this by a reduced method. Because the original methods are not $P$ - equivalent, the output approximations in the combined method are not in the same partition. Hence, by Theorem 381G, there exists $t \in T$ such that $\Phi _ { i } ( t )$ takes on different values for these two approximations.

$E q u i v a l e n c e \Rightarrow P$ -equivalence. Suppose two methods are equivalent but not $P$ -equivalent. Carry out the same construction as in the immediately previous part of the proof. By Theorem 381G, there is an initial value problem satisfying the requirements of Definition 381A such that $Y _ { i }$ takes on different values for the two output approximations. This contradicts the assumption that the original methods are equivalent. $\sqcup$
