# 390 Introduction

In this section we consider several issues arising in the design and construction of practical algorithms for the solution of initial value problems based on Runge–Kutta methods.

An automatic code needs to be able to choose an initial stepsize and then adjust the stepsize from step to step as the integration progresses. Along with the need to choose appropriate stepsizes to obtain an acceptable accuracy in a given step, there is a corresponding need to reject some steps, because they will evidently contribute too large an error to the overall inaccuracy of the final result. The user of the software needs to have some way of indicating a preference between cheap, but low accuracy, results on the one hand and expensive, but accurate, results on the other. This is usually done by supplying a ‘tolerance’ as a parameter. We show that this tolerance can be interpreted as a Lagrange multiplier $T$ . If $E$ is a measure of the total error to plan for, and $W$ is a measure of the work that is to be allocated to achieve this accuracy, then we might try as best we can to minimize $E + T W$ . This will mean that a high value of $T$ will correspond to an emphasis on reducing computing costs, and a low value of $T$ will correspond to an emphasis on accuracy. It is possible to achieve something like an optimal value of this weighted objective function by requiring the local truncation error to be maintained as constant from step to step. However, there are other views as to how the allocation of resources should be appropriately allocated, and we discuss these in Subsection 393.

If the local truncation error committed in a step is to be the main determining criterion for the choice of stepsize, then we need a means of estimating the local error. This will lead to a control system for the stepsize, and we need to look at the dynamics of this system to ensure that good behaviour is achieved.

It is very difficult to find suitable criteria for adjusting order amongst a range of alternative Runge–Kutta methods. Generally, software designers are happy to construct fixed order codes. However, it is possible to obtain useful variable order algorithms if the stage order is sufficiently high. This applies especially to implicit methods, intended for stiff problems, and we devote at least some attention to this question.

For stiff problems, the solution of the algebraic equations inherent to the implementation of implicit methods is a major issue. The efficiency of a stiff solver will often depend on the management of the linear algebra, associated with a Newton type of solution, more than on any other aspect of the calculation.
