# 393 Error per step versus error per unit step

The criterion we have described for stepsize selection is based on the principle of ‘error per step’. That is, a code designed on this basis attempts to maintain the error committed in each step as close to constant as possible. An alternative point of view is to use ‘error per unit step’, in which error divided by stepsize is maintained approximately constant. This idea is attractive from many points of view. In particular, it keeps the rate of error production under control and is very natural to use. In an application, the user has to choose a tolerance which indicates how rapidly he or she is happy to accept errors to grow as the solution approximation evolves with time.

Furthermore, there is a reasonable expectation that, if a problem is attempted with a range of tolerances, the total truncation error will vary in more or less the same ratio as the tolerances. This state of affairs is known as ‘proportionality’, and is widely regarded as being desirable. On the other hand, if the error per step criterion is used we should hope only for the global errors to vary in proportion to $\mathrm { t o l } ^ { p / ( p + 1 ) }$ . The present author does not regard this as being in any way inferior to simple proportionality. The fact that error per step is close to producing optimal stepsize sequences, in the sense we have described, seems to be a reason for considering, and even preferring, this choice in practical codes.

From the user point of view, the interpretation of the tolerance as a Lagrange multiplier is not such a difficult idea, especially if tol is viewed not so much as ‘error per step’ as ‘rate of error production per unit of work’. This interpretation also carries over for algorithms for which $p$ is still constant, but the work might vary, for some reason, from one step to the next.
