<!-- source: IERS Conventions (2010)_IERS Technical Note No.36.pdf -->

<!-- pdf_type: normal; pages: 180; chunk_pages: 70 -->


<!-- chunk 0001: pages 1-70 -->
# International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service (IERS) Service International de la Rotation Terrestre et des Syst\`emes de R´ef´erence

IERS Technical Note No. 36

# IERS Conventions (2010)

G´erard Petit1 and Brian Luzum2 (eds.)

IERS Conventions Centre

1 Bureau International des Poids et Mesures (BIPM)   
2 US Naval Observatory (USNO)

# Verlag des Bundesamts f¨ur Kartographie und Geod¨asie Frankfurt am Main 2010

<table><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=4>Report Documentation Page</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=2>Form ApprovedOMB No.0704-0188</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=6>Pdoes not display a currently valid OMB control number.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=2>1. REPORT DATE2011</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=2>2.REPORT TYPE</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=2>3.DATES COVERED00-00-2011 to 00-00-2011</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=3 colspan=4>4. TITLE AND SUBTITLEIERS Conventions (2010)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=2>5a. CONTRACT NUMBER</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=2>5b.GRANT NUMBER</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=2>5c.PROGRAMELEMENTNUMBER</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=3 colspan=4>6. AUTHOR(S)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=2>5d.PROJECTNUMBER</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=2>5e.TASK NUMBER</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=2>5f.WORK UNIT NUMBER</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=4>7.PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)US Naval Observatory (USNO),3450 Massachusetts AvenueNW,Washington,DC,20392-5420</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=2>8.PERFORMING ORGANIZATIONREPORTNUMBER</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=2 colspan=4>9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=2>10.SPONSOR/MONITOR&#x27;S ACRONYM(S)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=2>11.SPONSOR/MONITOR&#x27;SREPORTNUMBER(S)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=6>12.DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENTApproved for public release; distribution unlimited</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=6>13.SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=6>14.ABSTRACT</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=6>15.SUBJECT TERMS</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=3>16.SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF:</td><td rowspan=2 colspan=1>17.LIMITATION OFABSTRACT Same asReport (SAR)</td><td rowspan=2 colspan=1>18.NUMBEROF PAGES179</td><td rowspan=2 colspan=1>19a. NAME OFRESPONSIBLE PERSON</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>a. REPORTunclassified</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>b. ABSTRACTunclassified</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>c. THIS PAGEunclassified</td></tr></table>

# IERS Conventions (2010)

G´erard Petit and Brian Luzum (eds.)

(IERS Technical Note; No. 36)

Technical support: Beth Stetzler, Sabine Bachmann, and Wolfgang R. Dick

International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service   
Central Bureau   
Bundesamt f¨ur Kartographie und Geod¨asie   
Richard-Strauss-Allee 11   
60598 Frankfurt am Main   
Germany   
phone: ++49-69-6333-273/261/250   
fax: ++49-69-6333-425   
e-mail: central bureau@iers.org   
URL: www.iers.org

ISSN: 1019-4568 (print version)

# Table of Contents

# 0 Introduction 6

0.1 Models in the IERS Conventions 7   
0.1.1 Classification of models 7   
0.1.2 Criteria for choosing models . 7   
0.2 Differences between this document and IERS Technical Note 32 8   
0.3 Conventions Center . 14

# 1 General definitions and numerical standards 15

1.1 Permanent tide 15   
1.2 Numerical standards 1 6

# 2 Conventional celestial reference system and frame 21

# 2.1 The ICRS 21

2.1.1 Equator . 21   
2.1.2 Origin of right ascension 22   
2.2 The ICRF . 22   
2.2.1 Optical realization of the ICRF 2 3   
2.2.2 Availability of the frame . . 25

# 3 Conventional dynamical realization of the ICRS 28

# 4 Terrestrial reference systems and frames 31

# 4.1 Concepts and terminology . . 31

4.1.1 Basic concepts 3 1   
4.1.2 TRF in space geodesy 32   
4.1.3 Crust-based TRF 3 4   
4.1.4 The International Terrestrial Reference System 34   
4.1.5 Realizations of the ITRS 3 5

# 4.2 ITRF products 35

4.2.1 The IERS network 35   
4.2.2 History of ITRF products 36   
4.2.3 ITRF2005 . 3 7   
4.2.4 ITRF2008, the current reference realization of the ITRS 39   
4.2.5 ITRF as a realization of the ITRS 39   
4.2.6 Transformation parameters between ITRF solutions 40

4.3 Access to the ITRS . 40

# 5 Transformation between the ITRS and the GCRS 43

5.1 Introduction 4

5.2 The framework of IAU 2000/2006 resolutions 43

5.2.1 IAU 2000 resolutions 44   
5.2.2 IAU 2006 resolutions 45

Implementation of IAU 2000 and IAU 2006 resolutions 45

5.3.1 The IAU 2000/2006 space-time reference systems 45   
5.3.2 Schematic representation of the motion of the Celestial Intermediate Pole (CIP) 45   
5.3.3 The IAU 2000/2006 realization of the Celestial Intermediate Pole (CIP) 46   
5.3.4 Procedures for terrestrial-to-celestial transformation consistent with IAU 2000/2006   
resolutions 47

5.4 Coordinate transformation consistent with the IAU 2000/2006 resolutions 47

5.4.1 Expression for the transformation matrix for polar motion 48   
5.4.2 Expression for the CIO based transformation matrix for Earth rotation . . . . 48   
5.4.3 Expression for the equinox based transformation matrix for Earth rotation . . 48   
5.4.4 Expression for the transformation matrix for the celestial motion of the CIP . 48   
5.4.5 Expression for the equinox-based transformation matrix for precession-nutation 49   
5.5 Parameters to be used in the transformation 49   
5.5.1 Motion of the Celestial Intermediate Pole in the ITRS 49   
5.5.2 Position of the Terrestrial Intermediate Origin in the ITRS 51   
5.5.3 Earth Rotation Angle 52   
5.5.4 Forced motion of the Celestial Intermediate Pole in the GCRS 54   
5.5.5 Free Core Nutation . 57   
5.5.6 Position of the Celestial Intermediate Origin in the GCRS 59   
5.5.7 ERA based expressions for Greenwich Sidereal Time 59   
5.6 Description of the IAU 2000/2006 precession-nutation model 61   
5.6.1 The IAU 2000A and IAU 2000B nutation model 61   
5.6.2 Description of the IAU 2006 precession 63   
5.6.3 IAU 2006 adjustments to the IAU 2000A nutation 64   
5.6.4 Precession developments compatible with the IAU 2000/2006 model 64   
5.6.5 Summary of different ways of implementing IAU 2006/2000A precession-nutation 65   
5.7 The fundamental arguments of nutation theory . 66   
5.7.1 The multipliers of the fundamental arguments of nutation theory 66   
5.7.2 Development of the arguments of lunisolar nutation 66   
5.7.3 Development of the arguments for the planetary nutation 67   
5.8 Prograde and retrograde nutation amplitudes 68   
5.9 Algorithms for transformations between ITRS and GCRS 69   
5.10 Notes on the new procedure to transform from ICRS to ITRS 71

# 6 Geopotential 79

6.1 Conventional model based on the EGM2008 model 79

6.2 Effect of solid Earth tides 81   
6.2.1 Conventional model for the solid Earth tides 81   
6.2.2 Treatment of the permanent tide 88   
6.3 Effect of the ocean tides . 89   
6.3.1 Background on ocean tide models 90   
6.3.2 Ocean tide models 91   
6.4 Solid Earth pole tide 93   
6.5 Ocean pole tide 94   
6.6 Conversion of tidal amplitudes defined according to different conventions . 96

# 7 Displacement of reference points 99

7.1 Models for conventional displacement of reference markers on the crust . . 99

7.1.1 Effects of the solid Earth tides 99   
7.1.2 Local site displacement due to ocean loading 108   
7.1.3 S1-S $^ 2$ atmospheric pressure loading . . 112   
7.1.4 Rotational deformation due to polar motion 114   
7.1.5 Ocean pole tide loading . . 116

7.2 Models for other non-conventional displacement of reference markers on the crust . . . 11

7.3 Models for the displacement of reference points of instruments 118   
7.3.1 Models common to several techniques 118   
7.3.2 Very long baseline interferometry . 119   
7.3.3 Global navigation satellite systems 119

# 8 Tidal variations in the Earth’s rotation 123

8.1 Effect of the tidal deformation (zonal tides) on Earth’s rotation 123   
8.2 Diurnal and semi-diurnal variations due to ocean tides . 124   
8.3 Tidal variations in polar motion & polar motion excitation due to long period ocean tides124

# 9 Models for atmospheric propagation delays 132

# 9.1 Tropospheric model for optical techniques . . 132

9.1.1 Zenith delay models 132   
9.1.2 Mapping function 133   
9.1.3 Future developments 134   
9.2 Tropospheric model for radio techniques 135   
9.3 Sources for meteorological data 136   
9.4 Ionospheric model for radio techniques 137   
9.4.1 Ionospheric delay dependence on radio signals including higher order terms . . 137   
9.4.2 Correcting the ionospheric effects on code and phase 142

# 10 General relativistic models for space-time coordinates and equations of motion 151

10.1 Time coordinates . 151   
10.2 Transformation between proper time and coordinate time in the vicinity of the Earth . 153   
10.3 Equations of motion for an artificial Earth satellite . 155   
10.4 Equations of motion in the barycentric frame . . 156

# 11 General relativistic models for propagation 159

.1 VLBI time delay

11.1.1 Historical background 159   
11.1.2 Specifications and domain of application . 159   
11.1.3 The analysis of VLBI measurements: definitions and interpretation of results . 160   
11.1.4 The VLBI delay model . 160   
11.2 Ranging techniques . . 164

# A IAU NFA WG Recommendations 166

# B IAU Resolutions Adopted at the XXVIth General Assembly (2006)

B.1 IAU 2006 Resolution B1 on Adoption of the P03 Precession Theory & Definition of the Ecliptic 168 B.2 IAU 2006 Resolution B2 on Supplement to IAU 2000 Resolutions on reference systems 168 B.3 IAU 2006 Resolution B3 on the Re-definition of Barycentric Dynamical Time, TDB . 170

D.1 IAU 2009 Resolution B2 on IAU 2009 astronomical constants 172   
D.2 IAU 2009 Resolution B3 on Second Realization of International Celestial Reference Frame172

This document is intended to define the standard reference systems realized by the International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service (IERS) and the models and procedures used for this purpose. It is a continuation of the series of documents begun with the Project MERIT (Monitor Earth Rotation and Intercompare the Techniques) Standards (Melbourne et al., 1983) and continued with the IERS Standards (McCarthy, 1989; McCarthy, 1992) and IERS Conventions (McCarthy, 1996; McCarthy and Petit, 2004). The current issue of the IERS Conventions is called the IERS Conventions (2010).

The reference systems and procedures of the IERS are based on the resolutions of international scientific unions. The celestial system is based on IAU (International Astronomical Union) Resolution A4 (1991). It was officially initiated and named International Celestial Reference System (ICRS) by IAU Resolution B2 (1997) and its definition was further refined by IAU Resolution B1 (2000) and by IAU Resolution B3 (2009). The terrestrial system is based on IUGG (International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics) Resolution 2 (1991). It was officially endorsed as the International Terrestrial Reference System (ITRS) by IUGG Resolution 2 (2007). The transformation between celestial and terrestrial systems is based on IAU Resolution B1 (2000) and was complemented by IAU Resolutions B1 and B2 (2006). The definition of time coordinates and time transformations, the models for light propagation and the motion of massive bodies are based on IAU Resolution A4 (1991), further refined by IAU Resolution B1 (2000) and IAU Resolution B3 (2006). In some cases, the procedures used by the IERS, and the resulting conventional frames produced by the IERS, do not completely follow these resolutions. These cases are identified in this document and procedures to obtain results consistent with the resolutions are indicated. Following IAU resolutions, the IERS reference systems are defined in the framework of the General Relativity Theory (GRT). In a few cases, models are expressed in the parameterized post-Newtonian (PPN) formalism using parameters $\beta$ and $\gamma$ (equal to 1 in GRT). These cases are identified with a note.

The units of length, mass, and time are in the International System of Units (Le Syst\`eme International d’Unit´es (SI), 2006) as expressed by the meter (m), kilogram (kg) and second (s). The astronomical unit of time is the day containing 86400 SI seconds. The Julian century contains 36525 days and is represented by the symbol c. When possible, the notations in this document have been made consistent with ISO Standard 80000 on quantities and units. The numerical standards in Table 1.1 have been revised in order to conform to the new IAU (2009) System of Astronomical Constants adopted with IAU Resolution B2 (2009; cf. Appendix D.1).

The basis for this edition was set at an IERS Workshop on Conventions, held on September 20-21 2007 at the Bureau International des Poids et Mesures in S\`evres (France). This document and the associated information (e.g. software) essentially follow the recommendations specified in the executive summary of the workshop ${ < } ^ { 1 } >$ . All electronic files associated with the IERS Conventions (2010) may be found on identical web pages maintained at the BIPM 2 (this pages will be referenced in this document) and at the USNO 3. The recommended models, procedures and constants used by the IERS follow the research developments and the recommendations of international scientific unions. When needed, updates to this edition of the Conventions will be available electronically at the IERS Conventions Center website ${ < } ^ { 4 } >$ . The principal changes between this edition and the IERS Conventions (2003) are listed in Section 0.2 below.

# 0.1 Models in the IERS Conventions

This section provides guidelines and criteria for models included in the IERS Conventions and for their usage in generating IERS reference products. All of the contributions used for generating IERS reference products should be consistent with the description in this document. If contributors to the IERS do not fully comply with these guidelines, they should carefully identify the exceptions. In these cases, the contributor provides an assessment of the effects of the departures from the conventions so that his/her results can be referred to the IERS Reference Systems. Contributors may use models equivalent to those specified herein if they assess the equivalence.

# 0.1.1 Classification of models

Models to represent physical effects can be classified into three categories:

Class 1 (“reduction”) models are those recommended to be used a priori in the reduction of raw space geodetic data in order to determine geodetic parameter estimates, the results of which are then subject to further combination and geophysical analysis. The Class 1 models are accepted as known a priori and are not adjusted in the data analysis. Therefore their accuracy is expected to be at least as good as the geodetic data (1 mm or better). Class 1 models are usually derived from geophysical theories. Apart from a few rare exceptions, the models and their numerical constants should be based on developments that are fully independent of the geodetic analyses and results that depend on them. Whenever possible, they should preferably be in closed-form expressions for ease of use, and their implementation should be flexible enough to allow testing alternate realizations, if needed. A good example is the solid Earth tide model for station displacements (see Chapter 7).

Class 2 (“conventional”) models are those that eliminate an observational singularity and are purely conventional in nature. This includes many of the physical constants. Other examples are the ITRF rotational datum, specifying the rotation origin and the rotation rate of the ITRF (see Chapter 4). As indicated by their name, Class 2 models may be purely conventional or the convention may be to realize a physical condition. When needed, choices among possible conventions are guided by Union resolutions and historic practice, which may differ in some cases.

Class 3 (“useful”) models are those that are not required as either Class 1 or 2. This includes, for instance, the zonal tidal variations of UT1/LOD (see Chapter 8), as an accurate zonal tide model is not absolutely required in data analysis though it can be helpful and is very often used internally in a remove/restore approach. In addition, such a model is very much needed to interpret geodetic LOD results in comparisons with geophysical excitation processes, for instance. Class 3 also includes models which cannot (yet) fulfill the requirements for Class 1 such as accuracy or independence of geodetic results, but are useful or necessary to study the physical processes involved.

In the external exchange of geodetic results for the generation of IERS products, all Class 1 effects and specified Class 2 effects should be included, i.e. the models should be removed from the observational estimates. On the other hand, Class 3 effects should never be included in generating such results.

As much as possible, the documentation of the software provided by the IERS Conventions Center indicates the class associated with the model.

# 0.1.2 Criteria for choosing models

The IERS Conventions intend to present a complete and consistent set of the necessary models of the Class 1 and Class 2 types, including implemented software. Where conventional choices must be made (Class 2), the Conventions provide a unique set of selections to avoid ambiguities among users. The resolutions of the international scientific unions and historical geodetic practice provide guidance when equally valid choices are available. Class 3 models are included when their use is likely to be sufficiently common, as a guidance to users.

For station displacement contributions (Chapter 7), the Conventions clearly distinguish models which are to be used in the generation of the official IERS products from other (Class 3) models. Models in the first category, used to generate the IERS realization of the celestial and terrestrial reference systems and of the transformation between them, are referred to as “conventional displacement contributions.” Conventional displacement contributions include Class 1 models (essential and geophysically based) that cover the complete range of daily and sub-daily variations, including all tidal effects, and other accurately modeled effects (mostly at longer periods). They relate the regularized positions of reference markers on the crust to their conventional instantaneous positions (see Chapter 4) and are described in Section 7.1. In addition, models for technique-specific effects, described in Section 7.3, relate the positions of reference markers to the reference points of instruments.

# 0.2 Differences between this document and IERS Technical Note 32

The structure of the IERS Conventions (2003) has been retained in this document, but the titles of some chapters have been changed, as indicated. Authors and major contributors of the previous (2003) version of the chapters may be found in the introduction to the Conventions (2003). The most significant changes from the previous version are outlined below for each chapter, along with the major contributors to the changes. These changes are also indicated in two tables that present the realization of reference frames and their accuracy estimates (Table 0.1) and the models along with estimates of the magnitude of the effects (Table 0.2).

The IERS Conventions are one of the products of the IERS Conventions Center. However, this volume would not be possible without the contributions acknowledged below for each chapter. In addition, we would also like to acknowledge the work of the Advisory Board for the IERS Conventions update, that was set up in 2005 under the chairmanship of Jim Ray to advise the Conventions Center in its work of updating the Conventions, with members representing all components of the IERS. Among those, special thanks are due to Ralf Schmid for providing detailed comments and corrections to nearly all chapters in this volume.

Table 0.1: Estimates of accuracy of reference frames   

<table><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Ch.</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Reference frame</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Conventions2003</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Conventions2010</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Accuracy &amp; difference/improvement between Con-ventions</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>celestial referencesystem &amp; frame</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>ICRF-Ext.1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>ICRF-2</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Noise floor ≈ 40 μas (5 times better than ICRF-Ext.1).Axis stability ≈ 10 μas (twice as stable asICRF-Ext.1)．From 717 to 3414 total objects； from212 to 295“defining” sources</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>3</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>dynamical realiza-tion of ICRS</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>DE405</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>DE421</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>From 1 mas to 0.25 mas for alignment to ICRF</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>4</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>terrestrial refer-encesystem&amp;frame</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>ITRF2000</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>ITRF2008</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Accuracy over 1985-2008:1cm in origin，1.2 ppbin scale. Most important systematic difference vs.ITRF2000: drift in z-direction by 1.8 mm/yr.</td></tr></table>

Table 0.2: Models of the Conventions (2010): some information on the magnitude of effects and changes vs. Conventions (2003). Sec. indicates the section number in this document; Cl. stands for Class (see section 0.1.1).   

<table><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Sec.</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Cl.</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Phenomenon</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Amplitude ofeffect</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Conventions 2003</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Conventions 2010</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Accuracy &amp;difference/improvementbetween Conventions</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">5</td><td colspan="5" rowspan="1">Transformation between the ITRS and GCRS</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">5.5.1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">libration inpolar motion</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">tens of μas</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">No specificroutine</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">BrzezinskiPMSDNUT2model</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Specific routine</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">5.5.3</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">libration inthe axialcomponent ofrotation</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"> several μs in UT1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Not available</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Brzezinski &amp;Capitaine (2003)UTLIBR model</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">New model</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">5.5.4</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">precession-nutation ofthe CIP</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">tens of as/yr andtens of as for theperiodic part inX and Y</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">IAU2000 PN</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">IAU2006/2000PN</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">100 μas/c. + 7 mas/c.2in X; 500 μas/c. in Y</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">5.5.5</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">3</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">FCN</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Few hundred μas</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">not available</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Lambert model</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Accuracy: 50 μas rms,100 μas at one yearextrapolation</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">5.5.6</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"> space motionof the CIO</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">mas/c.</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">IAU2000 PN</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">IAU2006/2000PN</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">no change larger than ]μas after one century</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">6</td><td colspan="5" rowspan="1">Geopotential</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">6.1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Global geopotentialmodel</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">10-³ of centralpotential</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">EGM96</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">EGM2008; C20and rates of lowdegree coefs fromother sources</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">EGM96: degree andorder 360;EGM2008:complete to degree andorder 2159; rate termsfor low degree coefs.</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">6.2</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Solid Earthtides</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">10-8 on C2m,10-12on C3m,C4m</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Eanes et al.,1983; Mathews etal., 2002</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Unchanged</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">No change</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">6.3</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Ocean tides</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">For LEO orbitintegration:decimetric over 1day</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">CSR 3.0</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">FES2004;Treatment ofsecondary wavesspecified</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Effect of new model forLEO /MEO: few mmover several daysintegration; Treatmentof secondary waves forLEO: 20% of totaleffect</td></tr><tr><td colspan="7" rowspan="1">continued on next page</td></tr><tr><td colspan="7" rowspan="1">continued from previous page</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">6.4</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Solid Earthpole tide</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">10-9 on C21,S21</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Centrifugal effectvs. conventionalmean pole (2003)</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Centrifugal effectvs. conventionalmean pole (2010)</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Change of conventionalmean pole: effect of afew 10-11 on C21, S21</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">6.5</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"> Ocean poletide</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Few 10-11 on lowdegree coefs</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Not available</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Desai (2002)</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">New model</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">7</td><td colspan="5" rowspan="1">Displacement of reference points</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">7.1.1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Solid Earthtides</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">decimetric</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Conventionalroutine fromDehant &amp;Mathews</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Unchanged</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">No change</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">7.1.2</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"> Ocean loading</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">centimetric</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Loading responsefrom Scherneck(several tidemodels); noconventionalimplementation.</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Loading responsefrom Scherneck(several tidemodels);Implementationby Agnewsoftware (342constituent tides)</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">7.1.3</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">S1-S2Atmosphericpressureloading</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">millimetric</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">not available</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Implementationof Ray &amp; Ponte(2003)byvanDam</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">New model</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">7.1.4</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Conventionalmean pole</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Hundreds of mas</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">linear model</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">cubic model from1976.0 until2010.0; linearmodel after2010.0</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">tens of mas.</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">7.1.4</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Pole tide</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">2 cm radial, fewmm tangential</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Centrifugal effectvs. conventionalmean pole (2003)</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Centrifugal effectvs. conventionalmean pole (2010)</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Change of conventionalpole: effect may reach1mm</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">7.1.5</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Ocean poletide loading</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">2 mm radial,&lt;1 mm tangential</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Not available</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Desai (2002)</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">New model</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">7.3.1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">3</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Referencepoints ofinstruments:effect oftemperatureand pressure</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">~1mm</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Not specified</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Referencetemperature andpressure: GPTmodel, Boehm etal. (2007)</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Between using averagein situ temperaturemeasurements andGPT:&lt;0.5 mm siteheight change due toantenna thermaldeformation</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">7.3.2</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Thermaldeformation ofVLBI antenna</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">&gt; 10 ps on VLBIdelay, severalmm variation incoordinates</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Nothnagel et al.(1995)</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Nothnagel (2009)</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Reference temperaturesdefined according toGPT model; reduction in annual scalevariations of about1mm</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">7.3.3</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">GNSS antennaphase centeroffsets andvariations</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">decimetric</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Not specified</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Schmid et al.(2007)</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">10-9 on scale;tropospheric zenithdelay and GPS orbitconsistency improved</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">8</td><td colspan="5" rowspan="1">Tidal variations in the Earth's rotation</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">8.1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">3</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Zonal tides onUT1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">785 μs at Mf</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Defraigne andSmits (1999) 62terms</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Combination ofYoder et al.(1981) elasticbody tide, Wahrand Bergen(1986) inelasticbody tide,andKantha et al.(1998) ocean tidemodels</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">6 μs at Mf</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">8.2</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Subdaily tides</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">~ 0.5 μas for PM~ 0.05 ms forUT1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Ray et al.(1994)；conventionalimplementationby Eanes</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">No change</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">No change</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">8.3</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">3</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">long-periodtides, polarmotion</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">(pro- grade,retrograde)polar motionamplitude of (66,74) μas at Mf</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Not available</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Dickman andNam (1995),Dickman andGross (2009)</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">(prograde, retrograde)polar motion amplitudeof (66,74) μas at Mf</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">9</td><td colspan="5" rowspan="1"> Models for atmospheric propagation delays</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">9.1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Troposphere;optical</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">~ 2.2m at zenithto ~ 14m at 10°above horizon</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Marini andMurray (1973)</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Mendes andPavlis (2004)zenith delay;Mendes andPavlis (2003)"Fcul” mappingfunction (MF)</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">more accurate delaysbelow 20° elevation andall the way to 3° abovehorizon; accurate to ~7 mm (Total error dueto ZTD and MF)</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">9.2</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Troposphere;radio</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Hydrostaticzenith delays ~2.3 m Wet zenithdelays typically~ 10-150mm</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Several MFe.g. Neill (1996)or Lanyi (1984)</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">MF: VMF1based on 6-hourECMWF data.GMF based only on latitude, siteheight, time ofyear (Boehm etal., 2006)</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Both VMF1 and GMFremovelatitude-dependentmapping function bias(average ~ 4mm in siteheight).VMF1 reducesshort-term verticalscatter (average ~4-5mm)</td></tr><tr><td colspan="7" rowspan="1">continued on next page</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">9.2</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Troposphere;horizontal gradients</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">can lead tosystematic errorsin the scale ofestimated TRFat level of ~ 1ppb</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Not available</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">J. Boehm APG apriori model</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">New model</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">9.4</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Ionosphere;radio: Firstorder term</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">can reach 100 nsfor GPS</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Not available</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Sources forVertical TEC +conventionalmapping function</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">New model</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">9.4</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Ionosphere;radio: Higher order termsfordual-frequency</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">can reach 100 psfor GPS; a few psfor wide-bandVLBI</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Not available</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Conventionalmodel based onSlant TEC +Magnetic fieldmodel</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">New model</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">10</td><td colspan="6" rowspan="1">General relativistic models for spacetime coordinates and equations of motion</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">10.1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">2</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Timecoordinates</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">TCB, TDB inbarycentric;TCG, TT ingeocentric</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">IAU1991-IAU2000</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">IAU1991-IAU2000;IAU2006 TDBdefinition</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">New TDB definition</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">10.1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">TCB-TCGtransforma-tion</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">1.5 ms annual; 2 μs diurnal onEarth</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">FB2001; TE405;HF2002</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">HF2002_IERS</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">HF2002_IERS vs.HF2002: 1.15 × 10-16in rate;</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">10.2</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">transforma-tion between proper timeandcoordinatetime nearEarth</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">GNSS: frequencyshift of~4-5×10-10 +periodic term ofseveral tens of ns</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Not specified</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">ConventionalGNSS modelspecified;Information onnext mostsignificant term.</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">New model</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">11</td><td colspan="5" rowspan="1">General relativistic models for propagation</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">11.1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">VLBI delay</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">tens of ms</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">conventional‘consensus'model</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">no change</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Uncertainty of model:1ps</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">11.2</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">1</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">time ofpropagationfor rangingtechniques</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">up to a few s</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">conventionalmodel</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"> no change</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">Uncertainty of model:3ps</td></tr></table>
