<!-- source: Observational Astrophysics Lena.pdf -->

<!-- pdf_type: normal; pages: 724; chunk_pages: 70 -->


<!-- chunk 0001: pages 1-70 -->
# Pierre Lena Daniel Rouan Frangois Lebrun·Francois Mignard Didier Pelat

# Observational Astrophysics

Third Edition

# ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS LIBRARY

# Series Editors:

G. Borner, Garching, Germany ¨   
A. Burkert, M¨unchen, Germany   
W. B. Burton, Charlottesville, VA, USA and Leiden, The Netherlands   
A. Coustenis, Meudon, France   
M. A. Dopita, Canberra, Australia   
B. Leibundgut, Garching, Germany   
A. Maeder, Sauverny, Switzerland   
P. Schneider, Bonn, Germany   
V. Trimble, College Park, MD, and Irvine, CA, USA

# Pierre Lena´ Daniel Rouan Franc¸ois Lebrun  Franc¸ois Mignard Didier Pelat

In collaboration with Laurent Mugnier

# Observational Astrophysics

Translated by S. Lyle

Third Edition

Pierre Lena´   
Universite Paris Diderot &´   
Observatoire de Paris (LESIA)   
92195 Meudon   
France   
pierre.lena@obspm.fr   
Daniel Rouan   
Didier Pelat   
Observatoire de Paris (LESIA)   
92195 Meudon   
France   
daniel.rouan $@$ obspm.fr   
pelat@obspm.fr   
Franc¸ois Lebrun   
Laboratoire Astroparticules et Cosmologie   
Universite Paris Diderot & Commissariat´ a\`   
l’energie atomique et aux´ energies´   
alternatives   
10 rue A. Domon & L. Duquet, 75205 Paris   
$\mathrm { C x l } 3$   
France   
francois.lebrun@apc.univ-paris7.fr   
Franc¸ois Mignard   
Observatoire de la Cote d’Azurˆ   
Laboratoire Cassiopee´   
Bd de l’Observatoire   
06304 Nice Cedex 4   
France   
francois.mignard@oca.eu

Library of Congress Control Number: 2011942601

$\circledcirc$ Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 1988, 1998, 2012   
-This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved, whether the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilm or in any other way, and storage in data banks. Duplication of this publication or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the German Copyright Law of September 9, 1965, in its current version, and permission for use must always be obtained from Springer. Violations are liable to prosecution under the German Copyright Law.

The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, etc. in this publication does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.

Cover figure: The mobile auxiliary telescopes $1 . 8 – \mathrm { m }$ in diameter) of the European Very Large Telescope (VLT), contributing to the interferometric mode (VLTI) of the VLT (see Chap. 6). The sky background is added from a real photograph.

Credit: Pierre Kervella, Observatoire de Paris

Printed on acid-free paper

# Preface

Up until the end of World War II, almost the only tools available for astronomical observation were telescopes, spectrometers, and photographic plates, limited to the visible range of the electromagnetic spectrum. This was a relatively simple technology, but carried to a high level of performance by the combined efforts of opticians and astronomers. Then in the 1950s came radioastronomy, followed by infrared, ultraviolet, X-ray, and $\gamma$ -ray astronomy, the birth and growth of spacebased observation, in situ observation of the Solar System, and the advent of computing with the massive improvement in data processing capacity that resulted from it, so many factors leading to an unprecedented explosion in astrophysical activity. The first French edition of this book appeared in 1986, after three decades of new observational developments, followed in 1988 by the English translation Observational Astrophysics, published by Springer. And yet, ten years later, this first edition had already given way to a second: CCD detectors had replaced photography and a new generation of giant optical telescopes was coming into being on the Earth’s surface, while the first cosmic neutrinos had been detected and the existence of gravitational waves indirectly demonstrated. The world astronomical community had also evolved since, apart from the English translation of the second edition in 1998, a slightly updated Chinese version appeared in Taiwan in 2004.

But after a further decade of astonishing developments in astronomical observation, the book must yet again be reworked. Adaptive optics has opened up entirely novel prospects for Earth-based optical telescopes, while interferometry can achieve angular resolutions on the ground today, and soon in space, that were previously only obtained at radiofrequencies. Meanwhile an assortment of new Earth- and space-based instruments are being developed today to explore the submillimeter range, still virtually uncharted, to observe objects with very high spectral shifts and the cosmological background radiation. The discovery of an ever-increasing number of exoplanets has led to many refinements of older techniques, such as coronography, while opening a new and fascinating chapter in the history of astronomy — the search for life in the Universe — in which physics, chemistry, and biology each play their role. There are new and more refined neutrino telescopes, while those developed to seek out gravitational waves are gradually being brought into service. And space exploration of the Solar System is still an issue, as more and more probes and in situ experiments go out to Mars, Titan, and cometary nuclei. The temporal and spatial reference frames used by astronomers, but others too, e.g., for detailed study of continental drift, are becoming increasingly accurate.

With the help of several new authors, we have therefore rewritten the book, reorganising and extending the material used in the previous editions. The work started out as lecture notes for a course one of us (PL) delivered to graduate students of astrophysics at the Denis Diderot University (Paris VII). The original section on methodology has been maintained. Apart from surveying the broad range of techniques specific to each wavelength, the details of which can be found in more specialised sources, our aim has been to present the physical foundations for the various types of instrumentation: telescopes gathering data, spectrometers analysing it, and detectors converting it into a signal. After the first four chapters, which deal with information carriers (Chap. 1), the effects of the Earth atmosphere (Chap. 2), basic photometry (Chap. 3), and spatial and temporal reference systems (Chap. 4), there follow a chapter each on telescopes, detectors, and spectrometers (Chaps. 5–8), with some emphasis of course on image formation.

The idea has been to bring out the main principles, describing levels of performance or the ultimate limits allowed by the laws of physics. So the guiding thread here lies in the properties of the photon (or the electromagnetic wave), since this remains the main information carrier in astrophysics. Acquisition, measurement, and quantitative techniques for analysing data constitute the theme of this book, and the choices made here reflect this objective. Such an approach necessarily limits what can be covered, and we make no pretence to exhaust all observational methods, nor to provide a complete and systematic presentation of the corresponding tools.

The increasing complexity, development timescales, and costs involved in today’s instrumentation have radically changed the way this kind of work is now organised, and indeed the whole profession. Very often, too often perhaps, those who design and build an instrument are not the same as those who use it and who interpret the observations. The present book will have achieved its aim if it provides some with the means to advance the pursuit of data, and others with the lights to understand the ‘black boxes’ that constitute contemporary observational equipment.

There have been two major additions to the new edition. One is a more detailed discussion of signal processing in Chap. 9, stressing the universal digitization of data and the power of computational tools which have revolutionized the way information is processed. This chapter is inevitably rather mathematical and stands out from the rest of the book, but we have no doubt that it will be of great interest to readers. Apart from this, Chap. 10 is entirely new, describing the way modern instruments gather huge volumes of data, making them available to all in data banks. This leads to the idea of the virtual observatory, something that has transformed the everyday life of the astrophysicist. Finally, the essential mathematical tools, such as the Fourier transform and an introduction to probability and statistics, can be found in the appendices. We have kept the exercises included in the earlier editions without modification or addition. Despite their sometimes rather simple or even dated nature, students have found them of some use, at least at the elementary level.

The rich supply of information, images, and up-to-date news available on the Internet might make it seem pointless to try to catch all this knowledge in longlasting written form. Naturally, the book includes a detailed webography, wherein the reader may find updates for all the subjects treated here. However, efficient use of the web can only be achieved within the kind of framework we hope to provide through this book. This has been the underlying idea that guided us while we were writing it.

Since the aim has been to produce a reference book, we have chosen to remove bibliographical references from the text as far as possible. We have simply put together a short bibliography at the end, not intended to be exhaustive. The reference books that seem to us to be potentially the most useful to the student, researcher, or teacher have been organised according to theme.

We could not possibly name or thank all colleagues or students, often later to become colleagues, who have contributed to the two first editions and provided illustrations. We would just like to thank Mme Claude Audy, who prepared the final version of the manuscript, and Mme Hel´ ene de Castilla of InterEditions\` (Paris), together with Eric Gendron, who carefully copy-edited. The current edition is indebted to Laurent Mugnier, who wrote part of Chap. 9, and Marc Huertas, who put together the webography. We are also grateful to Laurent Pagani for radiofrequencies, Michel Cribier for neutrinos, Philippe Laurent for gravitational waves, Jean Ballet for X-ray astronomy, Philippe Goret for ground-based $\gamma$ -ray astronomy, and Claude Pigot, who accepted to write or proofread parts of the text. The Fondation des Treilles generously hosted one of us (PL) in Provence (France) while the book was being finalised. We thank them for that, and also Michele Leduc\` for her tireless supervision of the Savoirs actuels series.

We have not forgotten that the two previous editions of this book were dedicated to the memory of the astronomer and physicist Philippe Delache (1937–1996). We hope that the present edition, following his example, will excite the enthusiasm of many new generations of students, attracted into this most wonderful of sciences — astronomy.

Paris

Pierre L´ena Daniel Rouan   
Franc¸ois Lebrun   
Franc¸ois Mignard Didier Pelat

A detailed bibliography is given at the end of the book. Only a few specific references are given in the course of the chapters, in the text or in footnote. Beside the classical names of journals, some specific abbreviations are used for frequent quotations of documents detailed in the bibliography, namely:

- AF for the book Astrophysical Formulae.   
- AQ for the book Astrophysical Quantities   
- ARAA for Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics.

# Contents

# Part I Foundations

# 1 Astrophysical Information 3

1.1 Carriers of Information. 4

1.1.1 Electromagnetic Radiation 4   
1.1.2 Matter: From Electrons and Nuclei to Meteorites. 5   
1.1.3 Neutrinos . 6   
1.1.4 Gravitational Waves 9   
1.1.5 In Situ Observation 10

# 1.2 Data Acquisition. 12

1.2.1 The Main Characteristics of Photons 12   
1.2.2 Observing Systems 12   
1.2.3 Reaching a Systematic Description of Observation . 27

# 1.3 Global Organisation of Astronomy 28

1.3.1 People 29   
1.3.2 Research Policies and Institutions 31   
1.3.3 Publications 34

# The Earth Atmosphere and Space . 39

2.1 Physical and Chemical Structure of the Atmosphere . 40   
2.1.1 Vertical Structure 40   
2.1.2 Constituents of the Atmosphere. 41   
2.2 Absorption of Radiation 45   
2.3 Atmospheric Emission 50   
2.3.1 Fluorescent Emission 50   
2.3.2 Thermal Emission 55   
2.3.3 Differential Measurement Techniques 56   
2.4 Scattering of Radiation . 58   
2.5 Atmospheric Refraction and Dispersion 61   
2.6 Turbulence Structure of the Earth Atmosphere 62   
2.6.1 Turbulence in the Lower and Middle Atmosphere 63   
2.6.2 Ionospheric Turbulence 70   
2.7 The Atmosphere as Radiation Converter . 70   
2.7.1 Ground-Based Gamma-Ray Astronomy 70   
2.7.2 Air Showers and Cosmic Rays . 71   
2.8 Terrestrial Observing Sites . . 71   
2.8.1 Visible, Infrared, and Millimetre Observations 72   
2.8.2 Centimetre and Metre Wave Radioastronomy. 74   
2.8.3 Very High Energy Gamma-Ray Astronomy. 75   
2.8.4 Very High Energy Cosmic Radiation 75   
2.8.5 Man-Made Pollution and Interference . 75   
2.8.6 The Antarctic 76   
2.9 Observation from Space 77   
2.9.1 The Advantages of Observation from Space 79   
2.9.2 Sources of Perturbation. 79   
2.9.3 Choice of Orbits 86   
2.10 The Moon as an Astronomical Site . 87   
Problems 89

# 3 Radiation and Photometry 93

3.1 Radiometry 94   
3.2 Aspects of Radiation 99   
3.2.1 Blackbody Radiation 99   
3.2.2 Coherence . 100   
3.3 Magnitudes 104   
3.4 Photometry Through the Atmosphere 109   
3.5 Calibration and Intensity Standards 110   
3.5.1 Radiofrequencies 110   
3.5.2 Submillimetre, Infrared, and Visible 112   
3.5.3 Ultraviolet and X Rays 117   
3.5.4 Gamma-Ray Radiation . 120   
3.5.5 Some Examples of Spectrophotometry 120

# 3.6 Calibration of Angular Dimensions 123

Problems 124

# Space–Time Reference Frames 127

4.1 Spatial Reference Systems . 129   
4.1.1 Definitions of Spatial Frames 129   
4.1.2 Astronomical Reference Frames . 131   
4.1.3 Change of Frame 138   
4.2 Practical Realisation of Spatial Frames 144   
4.2.1 Celestial Reference Systems 144   
4.2.2 Fundamental Catalogues 145   
4.2.3 The Extragalactic System 147   
4.2.4 The Hipparcos Frame. 151   
4.2.5 The Near Future: The Gaia Mission 155   
4.3 Temporal Reference Systems . 157   
4.3.1 Time Scales 157   
4.3.2 Atomic Time 161   
4.3.3 Coordinated Universal Time (CUT or UTC) 164   
4.3.4 GPS Time 166   
4.3.5 Dynamical Time Scales 167   
4.3.6 Dates and Epochs. Dealing with Long Periods 169

# Part II Data Collection

# Telescopes and Images 175

5.1 Image and Object in Astronomy . 176   
5.1.1 The Telescope and Geometrical Optics. 177   
5.1.2 Gravitational Optics 183   
5.2 Telescopes 184   
5.2.1 Radiotelescopes . 185   
5.2.2 Ground-Based Optical Telescopes: Visible   
and Near Infrared 189   
5.2.3 Space Telescopes, from Ultraviolet to Submillimetre 194   
5.2.4 X-Ray Telescopes 199   
5.2.5 Gamma-Ray Telescopes . 201

# 6 Diffraction and Image Formation 209

# 6.1 Diffraction by an Arbitrary Aperture . 210

6.1.1 The Zernike Theorem 211   
6.1.2 Coherence Etendue 214   
6.1.3 Diffraction at Infinity 216   
6.1.4 Spatial Filtering by a Pupil 221   
6.2 The Earth Atmosphere and Coherence Losses . 228   
6.2.1 Perturbations of the Wavefront. 229   
6.2.2 The Perturbed Image 232   
6.2.3 Effect of the Atmosphere on Interferometry 238   
6.3 Adaptive Optics 240   
6.3.1 Wavefront Measurement 241   
6.3.2 Phase Correction Devices 245   
6.3.3 The Final Image 246   
6.3.4 Sensitivity and Reference Sources 248   
6.3.5 New Concepts 252   
6.4 Astronomical Interferometry 256   
6.4.1 Obtaining an Interferometer Signal 257   
6.4.2 Light Transfer . 262   
6.4.3 Temporal Coherence. 264   
6.4.4 Loss of Spatial Coherence. 264   
6.4.5 Calibrating the Instrumental MTF 268   
6.4.6 Phase Closure . 271   
6.5 Astronomical Interferometers. 274   
6.5.1 Radiotelescope Arrays. 274   
6.5.2 Ground-Based Optical Arrays 286   
6.5.3 Space-Based Optical Interferometry 294   
6.6 High Dynamic Range Imaging (HDRI) . 298   
6.6.1 Coronagraphy and Apodisation 299   
6.6.2 Nulling Interferometry 311   
Problems 316

# Detectors . 323

# 7.1 General Properties . 324

7.1.1 Amplitude Detectors. Quadratic Detectors . 325   
7.1.2 Spatial Structure of Detectors . 326   
7.1.3 Temporal Response . 329   
7.1.4 Noise 330   
7.1.5 Characterisation of Detectors 331

# .2 Fundamental Fluctuations 332

7.2.1 Quantum Noise 336   
7.2.2 Thermal Noise 340

# Physical Principles of the Detection of Electromagnetic Radiation. 343

7.3.1 Detection of Quanta 344   
7.3.2 Detection of the Electromagnetic Field. 355

# 4 Astronomical Detectors from X Ray to Submillimetre . 355

7.4.1 Noise Performance 356   
7.4.2 Photographic Plates. 357   
7.4.3 Photomultipliers and Classical Cameras:   
X Ray, UV, and Visible . 359   
7.4.4 X-Ray Detection $( 0 . 1 \mathrm { - } 1 0 \mathrm { k e V } )$ ) 364   
7.4.5 Solid-State Imagers . 365   
7.4.6 Charge Coupled Device (CCD) 366   
7.4.7 The Hybrid CMOS Detector 373   
7.4.8 Observing Conditions in the Infrared 380   
7.4.9 Development of Solid-State Imaging Arrays . 381   
7.4.10 Bolometers . 383   
Astronomical Detectors: Radiofrequencies 387   
7.7 Neutrino Observing Systems 420   
7.7.1 Radiochemical Detection of Solar Neutrinos 421   
7.7.2 Neutrino Detection by Cherenkov Radiation . 424   
7.7.3 High Energy Neutrino Astronomy 425   
7.8 Gravitational Wave Detection 431   
Problems 437

# Spectral Analysis 441

8.1 Astrophysical Spectra 442   
8.1.1 Formation of Spectra 442   
8.1.2 Information in Spectrometry 448   
8.2 Spectrometers and Their Properties 455   
8.2.1 Quantities Characterising a Spectrometer 456   
8.2.2 Spectral Discrimination 459   
8.2.3 The Modes of a Spectrometer 460   
8.3 Interferometric Spectrometers 462   
8.3.1 General Criteria . 462   
8.3.2 Interference Filters. 463   
8.3.3 Grating Spectrometers . 463   
8.3.4 Fourier Transform Spectrometer 481   
8.3.5 The Fabry–Perot Spectrometer. 489   
8.3.6 The Bragg Crystal Spectrometer (X-Ray Region) 491   
8.4 Radiofrequency Spectrometry 494   
8.4.1 Spectral Discrimination Methods 495   
8.4.2 Submillimetre Spectroscopy 501   
8.5 Resonance Spectrometers 503   
Problems 504

# Part III Data Analysis

# 9 The Signal in Astronomy 509

9.1 The Signal and Its Fluctuations . 510   
9.1.1 Observing System and Signal 510   
9.1.2 Signal and Fluctuations. Noise . 511   
9.1.3 Elementary Signal Processing 519   
9.1.4 A Specific Example of Data Processing 528   
9.2 Complete Model of an Observing System 529   
9.3 Overall Performance of an Observing System . 532   
9.3.1 Observing with the IRAM Millimetre Interferometer 533   
9.3.2 Observing with NAOS Adaptive Optics . 536   
9.3.3 Observing with the Photometric Satellite COROT. 538   
9.3.4 Observing with a Coded Mask Gamma-Ray   
Instrument . 541   
9.4 Removing Instrumental Signatures . 544   
9.4.1 Intrinsic Emission from the Instrument. 545   
9.4.2 Dark Current 545   
9.4.3 Non-Linearity Defects . 546   
9.4.4 Bias . 547   
9.4.5 Light Interference. 547   
9.4.6 Flat Field Corrections 548   
9.4.7 Defective Pixels. 549   
9.4.8 Effects of High Energy Particle Impacts 549   
9.5 The Problem of Estimation 550   
9.5.1 Samples and Statistics 550   
9.5.2 Point Estimation 551   
9.5.3 Elements of Decision Theory 551   
9.5.4 Properties of Estimators . 554   
9.5.5 Frechet or Rao–Cram´ er Inequality´ 564   
9.5.6 Efficient Estimators . 566   
9.5.7 Efficiency of an Estimator. 568   
9.5.8 Biased Estimators. . 568   
9.5.9 Minimum Variance Bound and Fisher Information 570   
9.5.10 Multidimensional Case 570   
9.5.11 Robust Estimators 571   
9.5.12 Some Classic Methods 573   
9.6 From Data to Object: the Inverse Problem 575   
9.6.1 Posing the Problem 576   
9.6.2 Well-Posed Problems . 579   
9.6.3 Conventional Inversion Methods 581   
9.6.4 Inversion Methods with Regularisation. 587   
9.6.5 Application to Adaptive Optics Imaging 592   
9.6.6 Application to Nulling Interferometry 595   
Problems 597

# 10 Sky Surveys and Virtual Observatories 605

10.1 Statistical Astrophysics 605   
10.2 Large Sky Surveys 608   
10.2.1 Sky Surveys at Visible Wavelengths 610   
10.2.2 Infrared Sky Surveys 614   
10.3 A Virtual Observatory 615

# Fourier Transforms. 619

# A.1 Definitions and Properties 619

A.1.1 Definitions 619   
A.1.2 Some Properties 620   
A.1.3 Important Special Cases in One Dimension . 622   
A.1.4 Important Special Cases in Two Dimensions 625   
A.1.5 Important Theorems . 626   
A.2 Physical Quantities and Fourier Transforms 631   
A.3 Wavelets 635

# B Random Processes and Variables 637

B.1 Random Variables 637   
B.2 Random or Stochastic Processes 644   
B.3 Physical Measurements and Estimates 653   
B.3.1 An Example of Estimation: The Law   
of Large Numbers 654   
B.3.2 Estimating the Moments of a Process 655

Physical and Astronomical Constants . 659

D Tables of Space Missions . 661

# E Webography 663

E.1 Main Earth-Based Telescopes 663   
E.2 Recent Space Missions . 667   
E.3 Databases 669   
E.4 Journals 672   
E.5 Bibliographical Research 673   
E.6 Image Sources . 673   
E.7 Education 675   
E.8 Computing and Astronomy 676   
E.9 Resources . 677

F Acronyms 679

Bibliography 687

Index . 705

# Part I Foundations
