Chapter IV.-Numerical results for terms of the second order.

Future chapters will contain thc terms of thc third, fourtli ...orders.

With regard to the calculations, no tronblc has been spared to secure correciness. Errors are of two kinds, those which are merely numerieal and those which are partly algebraical-i.e. duc to tle usc of a wrong scries of factors or to the omission of some series of terms.To test thc former, equations of verifieation were computed at evcry step,and the nature of the method rendercd thesc very numerous. An error of the later kind may escape such a verification,and will generally produce a large discordance ; the results were therefore tested bya rough comparison with those of another theory-say, that of DELAUNAY. One searching test of this kind has been applied to the majority of the terms now published,namely,the comparison of the motions of the perigee and node deduced therefrom with those deduced by HANSEN and DELAUNAY.

The results obtained so far point to certain appreciable errors in the theories of HANsEN and DELAUNAY. Dr. HiLL has shown \* that the last two terms of DELAUNAY's expression for the part of the motion of the perigee which depends on m only are wrong. The part of the motion of the perigee which depends on $\mathrm { e ^ { 2 } ~ J }$ have calculated in two quite different ways,and it appears that the last two, if not the last three, of these terms of DE1AUNAY's expression are seriously erroneous.t An crror in DELAUNAY's exprcssion for the part of the motion of the node which depends on $e ^ { \prime 2 }$ was actually traced down to an error of transcription in his theory.t HAysEN's theoretical value for the annual motion of the Iode appears to be at least one if not two seconds in error.§ Professor NEwcoMB in his discussion of the results obtained for the coefficient of parallactic inequality |l considers that HANsEN's value is about $\mathsf { o } ^ { \prime \prime } \mathsf { \cdot } _ { 3 } \mathsf { o }$ in error : this amount, though small in itself,is of importance if the coefficient be used to obtain the solar parallax. I hope before long to finisli the computation of this coefficient so as to obtain it within o"o2,and,at a later period, the values of the annual motions of the perigee and node, so far as these dcpend on solar action only,correct to $\mathrm { o } ^ { \prime \prime } { \cdot } _ { \Omega \mathrm { I } }$ .
