<!-- source: Numerical Recipes_ The Art of Scientific Computing.pdf -->

<!-- pdf_type: normal; pages: 1262; chunk_pages: 70 -->


<!-- chunk 0001: pages 1-70 -->
# NUMERICAL RECIPES

The Art of Sclentific Computing

THIRD EDITION

William H. Press Saul A. Teukolsky willtam T.Vetterling Brlan P. Flannery

The Art of Scientific Computing

Third Edition

# NUMERICAL RECIPES

# The Art of Scientific Computing

# Third Edition

William H. Press

Raymer Chair in Computer Sciences and Integrative Biology The University of Texas at Austin

Saul A. Teukolsky

Hans A. Bethe Professor of Physics and Astrophysics Cornell University

William T. Vetterling

Research Fellow and Director of Image Science ZINK Imaging, LLC

Brian P.Flannery

Science, Strategy and Programs Manager Exxon Mobil Corporation

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, São Paulo

Cambridge University Press   
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 8RU, UK   
Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York   
www.cambridge.org   
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521880688

$^ ©$ Cambridge University Press 1988, 1992, 2002, 2007 except for 13.10, which is placed into the public domain, and except for all other computer programs and procedures, which are This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provision of relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take place without the written permission of Cambridge University Press.

First published in print format 2007

ISBN-13 978-0-511-33555-6 eBook (NetLibrary) ISBN-10 0-511-33555-5 eBook (NetLibrary)

ISBN-13 978-0-521-88068-8 hardback ISBN-10 0-521-88068-8 hardback

Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of urls for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication, and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.

Without an additional license to use the contained software, this book is intended as a text and reference book, for reading and study purposes only. However, a restricted, limited free license for use of the software by the individual owner of a copy of this book who personally keyboards one or more routines into a single computer is granted under terms described on p. xix. See the section “License and Legal Information” (pp. xix–xxi) for information on obtaining more general licenses. Machine-readable media containing the software in this book, with included license for use by a single individual, are available from Cambridge University Press. The software may also be downloaded, with immediate purchase of a license also possible, from the Numerical Recipes Software Web site (http: //www.nr.com). Unlicensed transfer of Numerical Recipes programs to any other format, or to any computer except one that is specifically licensed, is strictly prohibited. Technical questions, corrections, and requests for information should be addressed to Numerical Recipes Software, P.O. Box 380243, Cambridge, MA 02238-0243 (USA), email info $@ \mathrm { n r }$ . com, or fax 781-863-1739.

Preface to the Third Edition (2007) xi

Preface to the Second Edition (1992) xiv

Preface to the First Edition (1985) xvii

License and Legal Information xix
