# 5. What are Numerical Recipes Webnotes?

Numerical Recipes Webnotes are documents, accessible on the Web, that include some code implementation listings, or other highly specialized topics, that are not included in the paper version of the book. A list of all Webnotes is at http://www.nr.com/webnotes. By moving some specialized material into Webnotes, we are able to keep down the size and price of the paper book. Webnotes are automatically included in the electronic version of the book; see next question.

<table><tr><td colspan="2">Tested Operating Systems and Compilers</td></tr><tr><td>O/S</td><td>Compiler</td></tr><tr><td>MicrosoftWindows XP SP2 Microsoft Windows XP SP2 MicrosoftWindows XP SP2</td><td>Visual C++ ver.14.00(Visual Studio 2005) Visual C++ ver.13.10(Visual Studio 2003) Intel C++ Compiler ver. 9.1</td></tr></table>

6. I am a post-paper person. I want Numerical Recipes on my laptop. Where do I get the complete, fully electronic version?

A fully electronic version of Numerical Recipes is available by annual subscription. You can subscribe instead of, or in addition to, owning a paper copy of the book. A subscription is accessible via the Web, downloadable, printable, and, unlike any paper version, always up to date with the latest corrections. Since the electronic version does not share the page limits of the printed version, it will grow over time by the addition of completely new sections, available only electronically. This, we think, is the future of Numerical Recipes and perhaps of technical reference books generally. We anticipate various electronic formats, changing with time as technologies for display and rights management continuously improve: We place a big emphasis on user convenience and usability. See http://www.nr.com/electronic for further information.
