# Part I Classical dynamics

1 Linear dynamical systems 3   
2 Nonlinear systems 24   
3 Chaotic motion 48   
4 Normal forms 74   
5 Maps on the circle , 100   
6 Integrable and quasi-integrable systems 115

Part II Quantum dynamics

7Torus quantization 155   
8 Quantization of ergodic systems 181   
9Periodic orbits in quantum mechanics 208

References 232

Index

235

# Preface

The discovery of chaotic behaviour in deterministic dynamical systems has had a profound efect in many areas of physics. There is now a large literature on this subject, which includes some important surveys. However, a physicist just entering this beautiful field or an advanced graduate student still finds the need for a concise introduction to the basic concepts in unsophisticated mathematical language. What are the essential distinc-tions between Hamiltonian (conservative) systems and dissipative systems? In what way will the presence of chaos in the classical limit affect a system appropriately described by quantum mechanics?

There is much to be gained by studying the theory of Hamiltonian systems against the background of general systems, in order to emphasize both contrasts and similarities. Liouville's theorem provides a remarkable distinguishing feature of Hamiltonian systems. The preservation of volume in phase space prevents the asymptotic collapse of the motion onto equilibria,periodic orbits,or‘strange attractors'. Even though perioddoubling cascades do occur in Hamiltonian systems, the loss of stability of a periodic orbit is only a local occurrence, rather than the-apocalyptic event that can subvert an entire dissipative system. In contrast the motion generated by a given Hamiltonian may exhibit diverse chaotic and regular orbits interwoven into rich structures.

There remains much to be unravelled concerning these global patterns, so that most of the classical theory in the first six chapters (Part I) deals with local motion. Periodic orbits, the fixed points of a Poincare map, provide the unifying theme. Thus, we begin with the linearization around a fixed point and proceed to consider its structural stability, that is, the qualitative effect of a nonlinear perturbation. Chaotic motion appears as the natural consequence of homoclinic intersections of the separatrices emanating from unstable fixed points. We then apply some of the basic concepts of ergodic theory to the study of the proliferation of periodic orbits in chaotic systems. Infinite families of fixed points are calculated analytically as an application of the theory of normal forms. In chapter 6 the focus turns to the invariant tori of integrable systems and the delicate problem of their preservation under perturbations - KAM theory.

Part I is devoted to the semiclassical limit of quantum mechanics. In principle the entire scenario lying between integrability and chaos,which has been uncovered within classical dynamics, must be approximately mimicked by the corresponding quantized systems. Nevertheless， the well-established results presented in chapter 7 apply only to integrable systems. The wonderful self-consistency of this theory,originating in the old quantum mechanics, becomes in itself a barrier for its generalization. Therefore, the quantization of chaotic systems is not yet fully understood, but we discuss some important results obtained on the basis of the Weyl-Wigner formalism. We also study the computational evidence that the fluctuations of the energy spectra of chaotic systems coincide with those of random matrices. Finally we return to the classical periodic orbits-we explain their remarkable effect on the eigenstates and the spectrum of the Hamiltonian by making full use of the concepts developed in Part I.

Most of the fundamental work on classcal dynamical systems has been carried out by mathematicians. Thus, the original literature compounds the difficulty of unfamiliar ideas (originating in topology, number theory, etc.) with the problem of translating modern mathematical language into the old-fashioned dialect still used by most physicists.The danger is that a complete translation would render the reader unfit to follow either the original references or future developments. I hope that, by providing minimal informal presentation of such concepts as diffeomorphisms and structural stability, this pitfall has been avoided. References are given only to the secondary literature from which most classical results have been obtained. Demonstrations present a further problem. Their inclusion was based on a double criterion, that is, simplicity and ‘plausibility'. Thus, intuitive results are deduced only if the proof is devoid of technicalities. Most proofs are only sketched and the‘theorems' arise informally. The exercises scattered throughout the text range from simple applications that help the reader to assimilate the subject, to considerable extensions of the theory.

This book originated in a course of lectures given at the Universidade Estadual de Campinas during 1985. An earlier version was published by Editora da Unicamp in 1987, so the present text represents both a translation and a revision of the original Portuguese book. My general view of dynamical systems developed through years of collaboration with M. V. Berry and J.H. Hannay in Bristol. Professor Berry's review articles were extensively used,and Iam also indebted to him for his careful scrutiny of the manuscript, though of course all its faults are my personal responsibility.Finally,I wish to thank Rosa Y.Kawaguchi for her precise typing,as well as Mary Nevader and my wife Susan for detecting and correcting grammatical anomalies in the English text.
